Hello everyone and welcome to the implementation of insertion sort lecture.
So just a quick reminder insertion sort builds that final sort of array or list one item at a time.
It's much less efficient on large lists than more advanced algorithms such as quicksort heapsort or
merge sort.
So again here your resource for review in the company Jupiter notebook and here's a function that we're
actually in a code out and go ahead and try ourselves.
So let's go ahead and jump to the live code and check it out.
First thing we're going to do start off for a function DPF and then we're going to go ahead and say
insertion sort.
So certain underscore sort and taken a r r which is going to be our array object in Python again.
That's just a list.
So first thing we're going to do is just go ahead and say for every index in array.
So let's say for I in range and we'll start from 1 to the length of the array.
And then we're going to do is go ahead a set current value and position so or create a variable in a
call at current value and it's going to be basically that value at the current position and then going
to make another variable called position and just call it.
I now again I could just be calling these direcly throughout the algorithm but it's nice to have these
variable names.
So we really are super clear about what's going on.
So then we're going to do is have our sorted sublist so you can go ahead and review the lecture case
you want to remember what that sort of sublease looks like.
That basically where we're going to do here scroll down a bit is say while position is greater than
zero and the value at position minus 1.
So that previous value essentially is greater than the current value.
Well we're going to do is set the value at that current position.
So position equals array position minus 1.
So this is basically a switch right.
And then if I say position equals position minus one I mean essentially just changing my position variable
and then I'll set the array value at that position equal to the current value I'm on.
OK and that's that's essentially it.
That's the sort of sublists that we're creating here.
And that's the insertion sort.
So let's go in and run it make sure it all worked out and then we'll go again line by line.
A quick review of what we've done so run that.
And let's go ahead and take an array.
We'll call this just a or are put in a bunch of numbers in any particular order we want since they are
not going to be sorted yet.
23:13 would say two.
OK.
And then we're going to say insertion sort.
On that array and then call the array back again notice just as a reminder I don't have a return function
anywhere in the wire or excuse me I don't have a return key word anywhere in my array.
So I have to manually call it out when I say A are here to make sure it works ok.
Awesome.
We have our sorted array.
So let's go ahead and go line by line one more time.
What's actually happening here in our function that we just created.
Let me zoom out so you can get the whole picture here.
All right so looking at this code let's just remind ourselves that here in this implementation of insertion
of sort showing here that there are again and minus one passes to sort and items.
So that's why this iteration starts at position 1 and then moves all the way through position and minus
1.
Remember because indexing starts at zero and because of the way range works this is one.
And this is actually and minus one.
So there are well this is and but the actual range it put out is at minus 1.
So let me just go ahead and make sure everyone is clear on that.
So if I pass in range from one to link of R and I'll define our as just one two three.
And you notice I get 1 2.
So it goes from 1 to and minus one here.
OK.
So we can see that this line right here this is our array at that position.
So the value of the array at that position equals array position minus 1.
That's essentially performing that shift operation that moves the value up 1 position list making room
behind it for the insertion.
So remember that this is not a complete exchange as was performed in previous algorithms we've seen
.
So that means that the maximum number of comparisons for an insertion sort is the sum of the first and
minus 1 integers.
So again that means order and square.
However in the best case only one comparison needs to be done at each pass.
So this would be the case for an already sorted list.
They happened to call this insertion sort algorithm on one know about shifting versus exchanging is
also important.
In general a shift operation requires approximately a third of the processing work of an exchange since
only one assignment is performed.
So in some benchmark studies insertion sort will actually show very good performance.
So it might be nice for you to check out the Wikipedia link in the notebook and go ahead and learn about
the pros and cons of a search sort in case that's a interview question later on.
So it gives you again the algorithm here you can check it out gives you talks about sort of partial
results those sublists that we're talking about.
And I'll also give you information of Best Worst than average cases of a nice discussion here.
They can prepare for your interviews with.
OK.
So those are the basics.
And that's just the implementation of insertion sort.
You can go and check out the previous lecture if you want to get a background on that theory but that's
really all there is to the implementation.
All right thanks everyone and I will see what the next lecture